# Predicting the Probability of Throwing Out Runners From the Outfield | CMC Data Science Capstone Project Spring '23

### Client: A Major League Baseball Team

### Abstract

In Major League Baseball, a problem that a team might face while at bat is properly assessing whether a runner should attempt a run to home plate given the state of the play. The goal of our project was to construct models to predict the probability of throwing a runner out at home base given the baseball was hit to the outfield. We were provided with two different data sets. The first involved plays where the runner is on third base and trying to run to home plate to score. In this data set in every play the ball is hit in the air and caught by the fielder without bouncing, so the runner on third must wait until the ball is caught to run to home. The second data set looks at runners starting on second base and every play is a single. This means that the batter successfully runs to first base without getting out and the runner on second base can leave as soon as the ball is hit. To model the third base data set, we used logistic regressions considering the radial distance of the fielder from home, the fielder’s arm strength, and the runner sprint speed to predict the probability of the runner being safe. The second base set was a little more complicated and we used a random forest model. With this model, we concluded that the most important factors in predicting if a runner is safe from second base were the time it takes for the fielder to get to and collect the ball, the difference in time between the fielder collecting the ball and the runner touching third, and the radial distance of the fielder from home plate.
